# Background

The Alaska Region of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is committed to improving the management of its data resources. A comprehensive, long-term plan to develop and implement a **Regional Data Management System (RDMS)** will begin in the spring of 2020, with the expectation that the RDMS will be operational and in use in 3 to 5 years. In the interim, there is a strong desire in the Region to begin managing both existing and new data resources with our current systems and staff capacity.&#x20;

Properly managed data are documented, secure, discoverable, and accessible. Documentation (i.e., metadata or data about data) provides sufficient and relevant information so that users can understand, interpret, and use all of the data and resulting products without additional guidance. Security procedures prevent loss and ensure data integrity. Discoverable data is readily found (e.g., using a data catalog), whereas accessible data is readily obtained (e.g., downloaded from a website). Using these qualities together ensures the effectiveness and efficiency of the data resources both within the Service and beyond.&#x20;

This document describes the data management activities necessary to build an archive folder for a project. Data resources within the archive folder are the subject of metadata records and these resources, supported by their metadata records, are the authoritative versions intended for long-term storage, all subsequent workflow, analysis, products, and sharing to outside partners. &#x20;

This Interim Data Management User Guide is primarily for early adopters and their supervisors in **Fisheries and Ecological Services (FES)**, **Migratory Bird Management (MBM)**, **National Wildlife Refuge System (NWRS)**, and the **Office of Subsistence Management (OSM).** This guide is a living document (working draft) and revisions will reflect the ongoing development of the available systems in addition to feedback obtained from users. The procedures and processes outlined here attempt to employ best practices under the current restrictions imposed by resource and policy limitations.  The team anticipates streamlining the current activities necessary in the interim for the final RDMS.

Although there are areas of overlap between project and data management best practices, this document does not specifically address best practices in managing data resources throughout the course of a project’s implementation (i.e., project workflow). Project workflow should be structured to maximize data integrity from creation or collection to the final archive described in this document. Project workflow is outlined in a data management plan (DMP), covering issues like field note to digital conversion, version control, and reproducible analyses. A Regional DMP, which can be customized for specific Program and project needs, will be developed separately.

The first section of the document, [The Big Picture: Integrating Data Management with Project Management](the-big-picture-integrating-data-management-with-project-management.md), places data management activities into the larger context of project management and provides guidance on determining which products should undergo data management. The second section describes the [Four Fundamental Activities of Data Management](../four-fundamental-activities-of-data-management/): [Establish Roles and Responsibilities](../four-fundamental-activities-of-data-management/establish-roles-and-responsibilities.md), [Quality Management](../four-fundamental-activities-of-data-management/quality-management.md), [Security and Preservation](../four-fundamental-activities-of-data-management/security-and-preservation.md), and [Documentation](../four-fundamental-activities-of-data-management/documentation.md). A description of each activity and implementation guidance is given. [File Organization and Best Practices](../acquire/file-organization-and-best-practices/) describes a recommended archive folder structure to use for every project and best practices in naming conventions to use in the file structure. Best practices for the Region’s most common types of data receive special consideration. Although the[ Sharing](broken-reference) section is under development, it will describe how metadata records and associated products can be made shareable outside of the organization. Appendices include a data management quick guide ([Appendix A](../appendix-a-interim-data-management-quick-guide.md)) and a tree diagram of the archive folder structure ([Appendix B](../appendix-b-tree-structure-for-file-organization-of-the-archive-record.md)). A [glossary](../glossary.md) is provided to define data management-related terms used in this document. The [Alaska Region Metadata Guide](https://ak-region-dst.gitbook.io/alaska-region-mdeditor-interim-user-guide/) supplements this document by providing specific guidance for using [mdEditor](https://www.mdeditor.org). The mdEditor is a web-based application used to create archive-quality metadata for projects and products.
